Add python decoding + Add YAML/JSON support (#44)
NordicSemiconductor/cddl-gen: ARCHITECTURE.md

cddl-gen Architecture
=====================

Since cddl-gen is a Python script that generates C code, this document is split into two sections:

1. Architecture of the Python script
2. Architecture of the generated code

Architecture of the Python script
=================================

The cddl_gen.py script is located in [scripts/cddl_gen.py](scripts/cddl_gen.py).

The functionality is spread across 5 classes:

1. CddlParser
2. CddlXcoder (inherits from CddlParser)
3. PythonClass (inherits from CddlXcoder)
4. CodeGenerator (inherits from CddlXcoder)
5. CodeRenderer

CddlParser
----------

Each CddlParser object represents a CDDL type.

> Since CDDL types can contain other types, CddlParser recursively parses a CDDL string, and spawns new instances of itself to represent the (child) types it contains.

Author: "Child" makes the hierarchical relationship more clear IMO. I'll think some more about this.

> Since CDDL types can contain other types, CddlParser recursively parses a CDDL string, and spawns new instances of itself to represent the (child) types it contains.

Author: I will stick with "child" for now, as it would be hard to change it everywhere, and I don't exactly know what I would replace it with in all cases. I added a sentence mentioning what "children" refers to.

The two most important member variables in CddlParser are `self.value` and `self.type`.

> `self.type` is a string representing the base CDDL type, which can be `"UINT"`, `"INT"`, `"NINT"`, `"BSTR"`, `"TSTR"`, `"FLOAT"`, `"BOOL"`, `"NIL"`, `"LIST"`, `"MAP"`, `"GROUP"`, `"UNION"`, `"ANY"`, or `"OTHER"`.

Author: I made them into a list with some details about the CBOR representation. Not sure exactly what you wanted. These types basically match 1-to-1 with the explanation of CDDL in the README.

`"OTHER"` means another type defined in the same document, and is used as a pointer to that type definition.
`self.value` means different things for different values of `self.type`.
E.g. for `"UINT"`, `self.value` has the value dictated by the type, or `None` if different values are allowed, so in the following example, Foo will have a `self.value` of 5, and Bar will have `None`.

```cddl
Foo = 5
Bar = uint
```

For container types, i.e `"LIST"`, `"MAP"`, `"GROUP"`, and `"UNION"`, `self.value` contains a list of their contents.
For `"OTHER"`, `self.value` is a string with the name of the type it refers to.
The following example shows both container and `"OTHER"`.

```cddl
Foo = uint
Bar = [*Foo]
```

This will spawn 3 CddlParser objects:

1. Foo, which has `self.type = "UINT"` and `self.value = None`

> 2. An anonymous child of Bar, which has `self.type = "OTHER"`, and `self.value = "Foo"`

Author: It has no explicit label in the CDDL. It refers to Foo, but there is no label for this usage of Foo. A label would e.g. look like:

    Bar = [my_foos: *Foo]

The actual parsing of the CDDL happens with regex expressions.
There are one or more expressions for each base type.
The expressions consume a number of characters from the input string, and also capture a substring to use as the value of the type.
For container types, the regex will match the whole type, and then recursively parse the children within the matched string.

CddlXcoder
----------

CddlXcoder inherits from CddlParser, and provides common functionality for the Python/JSON/YAML part and the C code generation.

Most of the functionality falls into one of two categories:

- Common names for members in generated code. A single type possibly need multiple member variables in the generated code to describe it, like
   - the value
   - the key associated with this value
   - the number of times it repeats
- Condition functions that make inferences about the type based on the member variables in CddlParser, like:
   - key_var_condition(): Whether it needs a key member
   - is_unambiguous(): Whether the type is completely specified, i.e. whether we know beforehand exactly how the encoding will look (e.g. `Foo = 5`).

PythonClass 
-----------

> PythonClass inherits from CddlXcoder and allows converting data between a number of different representations like CBOR/YAML/JSON strings, but also internal Python representations.

Author: Added a few sentences and moved the sentence from below up here.

- `<bytestring>` => `{"bstr": "<hex representation of bytestring>"}` or
- `<bytestring>` => `{"bstr": <CBOR decoding of bytestring>}` if `<bytestring>` is encodable as CBOR.
- `<tag, value>` => `{"tag": <tag>, "val": <value>}` where `<tag>` is the actual tag (a number), and `<value>` is the tagged value (the following CBOR object).

This way, the user can also specify these types in YAML and JSON files and have them converted to CBOR.

Finally, PythonClass can also generate a separate internal representation using `namedtuple`s to allow browsing CBOR data by the names given in the CDDL.
(This is more analogous to how the data is accessed in the C code.)

PythonClass functionality is tested in [tests/scripts](tests/scripts)

CodeGenerator
-------------

CodeGenerator, like PythonClass, inherits from CddlXcoder.
Its primary purpose is to construct the individual decoding/encoding functions for the types specified in the given CDDL document.
It also constructs struct definitions used to hold the decoded data/data to be encoded.

It contains quite a few optimizations to reduce verbosity of the code, and levels of indirection in the types.

> For example, if the type is unambiguous, the code will validated it, but it won't be included in the encompassing struct definition.

Author: I added more context here.

A CodeGenerator object operates in one of two modes: `"encode"` or `"decode"`.
The generated code for the two is not very different, but they call into different libraries.

Base types, like `"UINT"`, `"BOOL"`, `"FLOAT"` are represented by native C types. `"BSTR"`s and `"TSTR"`s are represented by a proprietary `cbor_string_type_t` which is just a `uint8_t` pointer and length.
These types are decoded/encoded with C code that is not generated.
More on this in the Architecture of the generated C code below.

There is sometimes a distinction between foo() and foo_repeated().

> This has to do with repetition (maxQ/minQ), where the foo_repeated() concerns itself with the individual value, while foo() concerns itself with the value including repetitions.

Author: Done

> `entry_types` are the types specified by the user as entry points into the decoding/encoding.

Author: Redid this.

> They are typically the "outermost" types, or the types it is expected that the data will have.

Author: Tried to add a sentence about this.

Usually such strings will automatically be decoded/encoded by the generated code, and the objects will be part of the encompassing struct.
Sometimes it's desirable that these are not automatically decoded/encoded, so when they are found to be in `self.entry_types` they will be stored as a regular `cbor_string_type_t`, and the user must manually decode/encode it via the provided API.

CodeRenderer
------------

CodeRenderer is a standalone class that takes the result of the CodeGenerator class and constructs files.
There are 3 files constructed:

- The C file with the decoding/encoding functions.
- The H file with the public API to some functions in the C file.
- The H file with all the struct definitions (the type file). If both decoding and encoding files are generated for the same CDDL, they can share the same type file.

CodeRenderer conducts some pruning and deduplication of the list of types and functions received from CodeGenerator.

Architecture of the generated C code
====================================

In the generated C file, each type from the CDDL file gets its own decoding/encoding function, unless they are trivial types, like `Foo = uint`.

> These functions are all file static.

Author: Changed to static

> The types indicated via `entry_types`, get public wrapper functions.

Author: ```suggestion
In addition, all types in `entry_types` get public wrapper functions.
```

All decoding/encoding functions operate on a state variable of type `cbor_state_t` which keep track of:

- The current position in the payload, and the end of the payload.
- The current position in a list or map, and the maximum expected number of elements.
- A list of backup states, used for saving states so they can be restored if decoding/encoding fails while processing an optional element.

Each function returns a `bool` indicating whether it was successful at decoding/encoding.
In many scenarios, a failure is fine because we don't know whether the object will be found or not.

> The scenarios include:

Author: These are actually the only two scenarios :P. I redid this to make more sense.

- An object with unknown number of repetitions (`minQ` and `maxQ` are not the same).
- `"UNION"`s where only one of the children should be present.

> In these cases, the code attempts to decode, and restores the state to before the attempt, and tries the next thing.

Author: Changed to "candidate type".

All generated functions take the form of a single enormous if statement. which "or"s and "and"s together statements depending on the children (typically only container types get a generated function).
Most actual assignment of values in the structs happens in the non-generated code.
So the generated code's job is mostly combining and validating calls into the non-generated code or other generated functions.

All functions (generated and not) have the same API structure: `bool <name>(cbor_state_t *state, <type> *result)`.

> Sometimes, the functions are cast to a generic function pointer type, and processed without knowledge of the type.

Author: Expanded this.

The number of arguments to the functions has been reduced to the absolute minimum because cumulatively it has a big impact on code size when there are many functions.

The non-generated files provide decoding/encoding functions for all the basic types (all types except `"OTHER"`).
There are also housekeeping functions for managing state, as well as some rudimentary logging to help debug why data fails to decode/encode.
There is also documentation for this code in the header files in the [include](include) folder.

> The code generation has multiple tests (in C) in the [tests/cbor_decode](tests/cbor_decode) and [tests/cbor_encode](tests/cbor_encode) folders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The C tests for the code generation can be found in the [tests/cbor_decode](tests/cbor_decode) and [tests/cbor_encode](tests/cbor_encode) folders.
```

 - `"GROUP"` (N/A)
 - `"UNION"` (N/A)
 - `"ANY"` (#0 - #5 or #7)
 - `"OTHER"` (N/A)

`"OTHER"` means another type defined in the same document, and is used as a pointer to that type definition.
The CDDL code that can give rise to these are described in the [README](README.md).

`self.value` means different things for different values of `self.type`.
E.g. for `"UINT"`, `self.value` has the value dictated by the type, or `None` if different values are allowed, so in the following example, `Foo` will have a `self.value` of 5, and `Bar` will have `None`.

```cddl
Foo = 5
Bar = uint
```

For container types, i.e `"LIST"`, `"MAP"`, `"GROUP"`, and `"UNION"`, `self.value` contains a list of their contents.
For `"OTHER"`, `self.value` is a string with the name of the type it refers to.
The following example shows use of both container and `"OTHER"` types.

```cddl
Foo = uint
Bar = [*Foo]
```

This will spawn 3 CddlParser objects:

1. `Foo`, which has `self.type = "UINT"` and `self.value = None`
2. An anonymous child of Bar, which has `self.type = "OTHER"`, and `self.value = "Foo"`
3. Bar, which has `self.type = "LIST"`, and `self.value` is a python `list` containing the above object.

> CDDL supports many other constraints on the types, and these all have member variables in CddlParser, e.g. `self.minQ` and `self.maxQ` which are the minimum and maximum quantity/repetitions of this type.

Author: How about `self.min_qty` and `self.max_qty`?

The actual parsing of the CDDL happens with regular expressions.
There are one or more expressions for each base type.
The expressions consume a number of characters from the input string, and also capture a substring to use as the value of the type.
For container types, the regex will match the whole type, and then recursively parse the children within the matched string.

CddlXcoder
----------

CddlXcoder inherits from CddlParser, and provides common functionality for PythonClass and CodeGenerator.

Most of the functionality falls into one of two categories:

- Common names for members in generated code. A single type possibly need multiple member variables in the generated code to describe it, like
   - the value
   - the key associated with this value
   - the number of times it repeats
- Condition functions that make inferences about the type based on the member variables in CddlParser, like:
   - key_var_condition(): Whether it needs a key member
   - is_unambiguous(): Whether the type is completely specified, i.e. whether we know beforehand exactly how the encoding will look (e.g. `Foo = 5`).

> PythonClass 

Reviewer 2: Given:

> PythonClass...allows converting data between a number of different representations like CBOR/YAML/JSON strings, but also internal Python representations.

I don't think this class name accurately represents its purpose, and instead comes across like a custom redefinition of the built-in `object`.

Perhaps something like `DataTranslator`, `DataConverter`, `TypeConverter`, `CborManipulator`, etc. would help make it more self-explanatory when seeing it used.

Author: Good point. The name has been nagging me, but I never got around to changing it.
I think I'll go with `DataTranslator`. Thanks.

 - `"UNION"` are typically implemented as anonymous `union`s which removes one level of indirection when accessing them.

A CodeGenerator object operates in one of two modes: `"encode"` or `"decode"`.
The generated code for the two is not very different, but they call into different libraries.

Base types, like `"UINT"`, `"BOOL"`, `"FLOAT"` are represented by native C types. `"BSTR"`s and `"TSTR"`s are represented by a proprietary `cbor_string_type_t` which is just a `uint8_t` pointer and length.
These types are decoded/encoded with C code that is not generated.
More on this in the Architecture of the generated C code below.

When a type is repeated (maxQ > 1 or maxQ > minQ), there needs to be a distinction between repeated_foo() and foo() (these can be either encoding or decoding functions).
repeated_foo() concerns itself with the individual value, while foo() concerns itself with the value including repetitions.

When invoking CodeGenerator, the user must decide which types it will need direct access to decode/encode.
These are typically the "outermost" types, or the types it is expected that the data will have, and they are kept in `self.entry_types`.

> The user can also use Entry types when there are `"BSTR"`s that are CBOR encoded, specified as `Foo = bstr .cbor Bar`.

Reviewer: The term "Entry types" is not used prior to this. I assume these are the types in `self.entry_types`. Would it be better to introduce the term in the section above?

Reviewer 2: WIth the phrasing of this sentence, it might be enough to insert a sentence after this one that briefly summarizes an Entry Type.

But if more than a simple sentence to describe it, introducing the term in the section above would be the right way to go.

Author: The concept is explained in the paragraph above, but as `self.entry_types` instead of "Entry types". Would it be clearer if I just changed this line to use `self.entry_types` as well? It's tricky, because `self.entry_types` is the internal representation, but for the user, they are passed via the command line. I don't know whether to have the inside perspective or outside perspective here.

Reviewer 2: IMO it would seem more prudent to use the user-facing reference than the internal one (throughout the document even).

Author: I changed the whole file to use only "entry types", so I assume it will be obvious that they are held in `self.entry_types` :).

Thanks

Usually such strings are automatically decoded/encoded by the generated code, and the objects part of the encompassing struct.

> However, sometimes it's desirable that these are not automatically decoded/encoded, so if they are found in `self.entry_types` they will be stored as a regular `cbor_string_type_t`, and the user must manually decode/encode it via the provided API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, sometimes it is desirable that these are not automatically decoded/encoded; storing them as regular `cbor_string_type_t` types if present in `self.entry_types` and manually decoding/encoding them via the provided API.
```
?

Author: ```suggestion
However, if the user instead wants to manually decode/encode such strings, they can add them to `self.entry_types`, in which case they will be stored as a regular `cbor_string_type_t` instead, and not decoded/encoded.
```

Reviewer 2: I like it! Some minor tweaks:

```suggestion
However, if the user instead wants to manually decode/encode such strings, they can add them to `self.entry_types`. In this case, the strings will be stored as a regular `cbor_string_type_t` instead of being decoded/encoded.
```

CodeRenderer
------------

CodeRenderer is a standalone class that takes the result of the CodeGenerator class and constructs files.
There are 3 files constructed:

- The C file with the decoding/encoding functions.
- The H file with the public API to some functions in the C file.
- The H file with all the struct definitions (the type file). If both decoding and encoding files are generated for the same CDDL, they can share the same type file.

CodeRenderer conducts some pruning and deduplication of the list of types and functions received from CodeGenerator.

Architecture of the generated C code
====================================

In the generated C file, each type from the CDDL file gets its own decoding/encoding function, unless they are trivial types, like `Foo = uint`.
These functions are all `static`.

> In addition, all types in `entry_types` get public wrapper functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, all types in `self.entry_types` get public wrapper functions.
```
?

All decoding/encoding functions operate on a state variable of type `cbor_state_t` which keeps track of:

- The current position in the payload, and the end of the payload.
- The current position in a list or map, and the maximum expected number of elements.
- A list of backup states, used for saving states so they can be restored if decoding/encoding fails while processing an optional element.

Each function returns a `bool` indicating whether it was successful at decoding/encoding.
In most cases, a failure in one function will result in a failure of the whole operation.

However, in the following scenarios, a failure is fine because we don't know ahead of time whether the object will be found or not:

- An object with unknown number of repetitions (`minQ` and `maxQ` are not the same).
- `"UNION"`s, since only one of the children should be present.

> In these cases, the code attempts to decode, and if it fails, it restores the state to before the attempt, and tries decoding the next candidate type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In these cases, the code attempts to decode the object. If it fails, it restores the state to before the attempt, and then tries decoding the next candidate type.
```
?

All generated functions take the form of a single if statement.
This if statement performs boolean algebra on statements depending on the children (typically only container types get a generated function).
The assignment of values in the structs mostly happens in the non-generated code.
The generated code mostly combines and validates calls into the non-generated code or other generated functions.

All functions (generated and not) have the same API structure: `bool <name>(cbor_state_t *state, <type> *result)`.
The number of arguments is kept to a minimum to reduce code size.

The exceptions to the API structure are `multi_decode`/`multi_encode` and `present_decode`/`present_encode`.

> These functions accept function pointers with the above API and runs them multiple times.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These functions accept function pointers with the above API and run them multiple times.
```

> When this happens, the functions pointers are cast to a generic function pointer type, and processed without knowledge of the type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When this happens, the functions' pointers are cast to a generic function pointer type, and processed without knowledge of the type.
```
Or
```suggestion
When this happens, the function pointers are cast to a generic function pointer type, and processed without knowledge of the type.
```
Either could work because they're both referring to the pointers accepted by the function, which are function pointers.
